University of Chittagong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 2nd Semester B.Sc. Engineering Examination 2024 Course Code & Title: PHY 241 Physics

Time: 04 Hours	Full marks: 54

Answer any THREE Questions from each of the following TWO S-ections.


SECTION-A
I. a)	Define electric fidd and potential. Write down the relation between them.


b) Draw the lines of force for two equal and opposite charges.
,	c)	Cal ulate the electric field due to a long straight wire.


2+
0.5
1
3.5

d)	Two equal and opposite charges of magnitude Sx105C are at a distance of'd' apart such	2
that their force of attraction is 4.5 N. Calculate the value of 'd'.
2. a)	State Gauss' law or electrostatics. Hence derive the differential form of Gauss' law.	1+3
.. b)	Mt:nlion fow applications of Ampere's law.	2
c) Explain Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction.	2
d) What is the magnetic field or 10 cm away from a long wire carrying a current of
10 amp?
3. a)	State Biot-Savarl law.	1
"b)	Using Biot-Savart law, calculate B for a long straight wire.	4
c) Write down the expression for energy stored in electric and magnetic field.	2
d) /\ <.:oil has an inductance of 0.5 henry and a resistance of 20 ohms. Ifa 100 volt-emf	2
is applied, what energy is stored in the magnetic field after the current has built up to its maximum value:.?
I(
4. a)	Whal arc ecosystems? Give example.	1.5
I,)	State the luw or <.:nnservation of matter and hence write about the role of matter in	t+
ecosystems.	1.5
c) What do you mean by environmental systems? Discuss the key components of	1+
cnvironmcntnl systems briefly.	t.5



),	)
l )
c)
d)

SECTION-H
11\'linl' glohnl rndintion. Mention the factors affecting glubal rt:t<liati TL
Dc:;crib A method or measuring glohal radiation with a pyranorneter. Whnt is ulbcdo?
Write obout earttt's energy balance.







b)
Ģ c)
cl)

What do you mean by periodic motion? Give examples. Define Simple Harmonic Motion (SI IM).
Show that x = Acoswt+ Bsinwt is the solution of the equation of SHM.
A body oscillates wilh SI IM according to the equation x = 6.0 cos (3rrt +? meters. What is (i) the displacement, (ii) the velocity, and (iii) the acceleration at time 2 sec.

2-t


3.5
1.5




7. a)	Define blackbody and blackbody radiation.
b) How can a blackbody be realized experimentally?

1+1
1.5

c) Sketch the energy distribution curves for blackbody radiation at three different	l.5+
temperatures and explain the features of the curves.	2.5
d) Calculate the temperature of moon if it is treated as a blackbody and the maximum	1.5
energy occurs at the wavelength Am= 14 Ąm.
8. a)	Explain diffraction oflight.	1.5
b) Draw a schematic diagram of the technique used to observe the diffractionofX-rays by	1.5+
a single c1ystal and explain how Laue patterns are formed.	1.5
,	c)	Derive Bragg's law.	3
d)	X-rays of wavelength ,l are being diffracted from a sodium chloride crystal having lattice	1.5
constant 2.82A . If the diffraction angle is 6░ for the fin,1 order diffraction, find the wavelength iL




;	I


